feat: Developer Guide - GUI - VS Code SQLTools (#14926)
pingcap/docs: develop/dev-guide-gui-vscode-sqltools.md

Reviewer: Preview: https://scaffold-git-preview-pingcapdocs14926-oreoxmt.vercel.app/tidb/dev/dev-guide-gui-vscode-sqltools

Connect to your TiDB cluster depending on the TiDB deployment option you've selected.

<SimpleTab>
<div label="TiDB Serverless">

1. Navigate to the [**Clusters**](https://tidbcloud.com/console/clusters) page, and then click the name of your target cluster to go to its overview page.

2. Click **Connect** in the upper-right corner. A connection dialog is displayed.

3. Ensure the configurations in the connection dialog match your operating environment.

    - **Endpoint Type** is set to `Public`
    - **Connect With** is set to `General`
    - **Operating System** matches your environment.

    > **Tip:**
    >
    > If your VS Code is running against a remote development enviorment, select the remote OS from the list. For example, if you are using Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL), switch to the corresponding Linux distribution. If you are using Github Codespaces, this doesn't matter.

4. Click **Create password** to create a random password.

    > **Tip:**
    >
    > If you have created a password before, you can either use the original password or click **Reset password** to generate a new one.

5. Go back to VS Code, click **Add New Connection**, and select **TiDB** type.

>     ![VS Code sqltools add bew connection](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-add-new-connection.jpg)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![VS Code SQLTools: add new connection](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-add-new-connection.jpg)
```

6. Fill in parameters in setting panal.

>     - Connection name: Please give a meanful name for this connection.
>     - Connection group: (Optional) A meanful name for the group of this connection. And the connections which have the same group name will be gethered together.
>     - Connect using: Please select **Server and Port**.
>     - Server Address: The parameter `host` from TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
>     - Port: The parameter `port` from TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
>     - Database: The database that you want to connect.
>     - Username: The parameter `user` from TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
>     - Password mode: Please select **SQLTools Driver Credentials**.
>     - In **MySQL driver specific options** scope:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Connection name**: give this connection a meaningful name.
    - **Connection group**: (optional) give this group of connections a meaningful name. Connections with the same group name will be grouped together.
    - **Connect using**: select **Server and Port**.
    - **Server Address**: enter the `host` parameter from the TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
    - **Port**: enter the `port` parameter from the TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
    - **Database**: enter the database that you want to connect to.
    - **Username**: enter the `user` parameter from the TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
    - **Password mode**: select **SQLTools Driver Credentials**.
    - In the **MySQL driver specific options** area, configure the following parameters:
```

>         - Authentication Protocol: Please select **default**.
>         - SSL: Please select **Enabled**. TiDB Serverless requires a secure connection. In **SSL Options (node.TLSSocket)** scope:
> 
>             - Certificate Authority (CA) Certificate File: sername: The parameter `ssl_ca` from TiDB Cloud connection dialog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - **Authentication Protocol**: select **default**.
        - **SSL**: select **Enabled**. TiDB Serverless requires a secure connection. In the **SSL Options (node.TLSSocket)** area, configure the **Certificate Authority (CA) Certificate File** field as the `ssl_ca` parameter from the TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
```

            > **Note:**
            >

>             > If you are running on Windows or Github Codespaces, you can leave this blank. Default is to trust the well-known CAs curated by Mozilla. Learn more about [TiDB Serverless root certificate management](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/secure-connections-to-serverless-clusters#root-certificate-management)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            > If you are running on Windows or GitHub Codespaces, you can leave **SSL** blank. By defaultm SQLTools trusts well-known CAs curated by Mozilla. For more information, see [TiDB Serverless root certificate management](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/secure-connections-to-serverless-clusters#root-certificate-management).
```

>     ![VS Code sqltools serverless connection config](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-connection-config-serverless.jpg)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![VS Code SQLTools: configure connection settings for TiDB Serverless](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-connection-config-serverless.jpg)
```

> 7. Click **TEST CONNECTION**, then click **Allow** in the popupwindow.
> 8. Enter `password` from TiDB Cloud.
> 
>     ![VS Code sqltools serverless password](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-password.jpg)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Click **TEST CONNECTION** to validate the connection to the TiDB Serverless cluster.

    1. In the pop-up window, click **Allow**.
    2. In the **SQLTools Driver Credentials** dialog, enter the password you created in step 4.

        ![VS Code SQLTools: enter password to connect to TiDB Serverless](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-password.jpg)
```

> 9. If you can see **Successfully connected!** text appared. Then click **SAVE CONNECTION**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. If the connection test is successful, you can see the **Successfully connected!** message. Click **SAVE CONNECTION** to save the connection configuration.
```

</div>
<div label="TiDB Dedicated">

1. Navigate to the [**Clusters**](https://tidbcloud.com/console/clusters) page, and then click the name of your target cluster to go to its overview page.

2. Click **Connect** in the upper-right corner. A connection dialog is displayed.

3. Click **Allow Access from Anywhere**.

    For more details about how to obtain the connection string, refer to [TiDB Dedicated standard connection](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/connect-via-standard-connection).

> 4. Go back to VS Code, click **Add New Connection**, and select **TiDB** type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Launch VS Code and select the **SQLTools** extension on the navigation pane. Under the **CONNECTIONS** section, click **Add New Connection** and select **TiDB** as the database driver.
```

>     ![VS Code sqltools add bew connection](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-add-new-connection.jpg)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![VS Code SQLTools: add new connection](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-add-new-connection.jpg)
```

> 5. Fill in parameters in setting panal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. In the setting pane, configure the following connection parameters:
```

>     - Connection name: Please give a meanful name for this connection.
>     - Connection group: (Optional) A meanful name for the group of this connection. And the connections which have the same group name will be gethered together.
>     - Connect using: Please select **Server and Port**.
>     - Server Address: The parameter `host` from TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
>     - Port: The parameter `port` from TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
>     - Database: The database that you want to connect.
>     - Username: The parameter `user` from TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
>     - Password mode: Please select **SQLTools Driver Credentials**.
>     - In **MySQL driver specific options** scope:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Connection name**: give this connection a meaningful name.
    - **Connection group**: (optional) give this group of connections a meaningful name. Connections with the same group name will be grouped together.
    - **Connect using**: select **Server and Port**.
    - **Server Address**: enter the `host` parameter from the TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
    - **Port**: enter the `port` parameter from the TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
    - **Database**: enter the database that you want to connect to.
    - **Username**: enter the `user` parameter from the TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
    - **Password mode**: select **SQLTools Driver Credentials**.
    - In the **MySQL driver specific options** area, configure the following parameters:
```

>         - Authentication Protocol: Please select **default**.
>         - SSL: Please select **Disabled**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - **Authentication Protocol**: select **default**.
        - **SSL**: select **Disabled**.
```

>     ![VS Code sqltools dedicated connection config](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-connection-config-dedicated.jpg)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![VS Code SQLTools: configure connection settings for TiDB Dedicated](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-connection-config-dedicated.jpg)
```

> 6. Click **TEST CONNECTION**, then click **Allow** in the popupwindow.
> 7. Enter `password` from TiDB Cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Click **TEST CONNECTION** to validate the connection to the TiDB Dedicated cluster.

    1. In the pop-up window, click **Allow**.
    2. In the **SQLTools Driver Credentials** dialog, enter the password of the TiDB Dedicated cluster.
```

>     ![VS Code sqltools dedicated password](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-password.jpg)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![VS Code SQLTools: enter password to connect to TiDB Dedicated](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-password.jpg)
```

> 8. If you can see **Successfully connected!** text appared. Then click **SAVE CONNECTION**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. If the connection test is successful, you can see the **Successfully connected!** message. Click **SAVE CONNECTION** to save the connection configuration.
```

</div>
<div label="TiDB Self-Hosted">

> 1. Click **Add New Connection**, and select **TiDB** type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Launch VS Code and select the **SQLTools** extension on the navigation pane. Under the **CONNECTIONS** section, click **Add New Connection** and select **TiDB** as the database driver.
```

>     ![VS Code sqltools add bew connection](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-add-new-connection.jpg)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![VS Code SQLTools: add new connection](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-add-new-connection.jpg)
```

> 2. Fill in parameters in setting panal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In the setting pane, configure the following connection parameters:
```

>     - Connection name: Please give a meanful name for this connection.
>     - Connection group: (Optional) A meanful name for the group of this connection. And the connections which have the same group name will be gethered together.
>     - Connect using: Please select **Server and Port**.
>     - Server Address: TiDB cluster host.
>     - Port: TiDB cluster host.
>     - Database: The database that you want to connect.
>     - Username: TiDB cluster username.
>     - Password mode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Connection name**: give this connection a meaningful name.
    - **Connection group**: (optional) give this group of connections a meaningful name. Connections with the same group name will be grouped together.
    - **Connect using**: select **Server and Port**.
    - **Server Address**: enter the IP address or domain name of your TiDB Self-Hosted cluster.
    - **Port**: enter the port number of your TiDB Self-Hosted cluster.
    - **Database**: enter the database that you want to connect to.
    - **Username**: enter the username to use to connect to your TiDB Self-Hosted cluster.
    - **Password mode**:
```

>         - If the password is empty, please select **Use empty password**.
>         - Otherwise, please select **SQLTools Driver Credentials**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - If the password is empty, select **Use empty password**.
        - Otherwise, select **SQLTools Driver Credentials**.
```

>     - In **MySQL driver specific options** scope:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - In the **MySQL driver specific options** area, configure the following parameters:
```

>         - Authentication Protocol: Please select **default**.
>         - SSL: Please select **Disabled**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - **Authentication Protocol**: select **default**.
        - **SSL**: select **Disabled**.
```

>     ![VS Code sqltools self-hosted connection config](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-connection-config-self-hosted.jpg)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![VS Code SQLTools: configure connection settings for TiDB Self-Hosted](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-connection-config-self-hosted.jpg)
```

> 3. Click **TEST CONNECTION**.
> 4. (Optional) If the password is not empty, click **Allow** in the popupwindow, then enter the password from TiDB cluster.
> 
>     ![VS Code sqltools self-hosted password](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-password.jpg)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Click **TEST CONNECTION** to validate the connection to the TiDB Self-Hosted cluster.

    If the password is not empty, click **Allow** in the pop-up window, and then enter the password of the TiDB Self-Hosted cluster.

    ![VS Code SQLTools: enter password to connect to TiDB Self-Hosted](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-password.jpg)
```

> 5. If you can see **Successfully connected!** text appared. Then click **SAVE CONNECTION**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. If the connection test is successful, you can see the **Successfully connected!** message. Click **SAVE CONNECTION** to save the connection configuration.
```

---
title: Connect to TiDB with Visual Studio Code

> summary: Learn how to connect to TiDB using Visual Studio Code (VS Code) or Github Codespaces. This tutorial gives visual instructions that work with TiDB using Visual Studio Code or Github Codespaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: Learn how to connect to TiDB using Visual Studio Code or GitHub Codespaces.
```

---

# Connect to TiDB with Visual Studio Code

> TiDB is a MySQL-compatible database, and [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)(or VS Code, VSC) is a lightweight but powerful source code editor. In this tutorial, we will use the [vscode-sqltools](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=mtxr.sqltools) extension which supports TiDB as an [official driver](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=mtxr.sqltools-driver-mysql).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TiDB is a MySQL-compatible database, and [Visual Studio Code (VS Code)](https://code.visualstudio.com/) is a lightweight but powerful source code editor. This tutorial uses the [SQLTools](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=mtxr.sqltools) extension which supports TiDB as an [official driver](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=mtxr.sqltools-driver-mysql).
```

> In this tutorial, you will learn how to use to connect to your TiDB cluster using Visual Studio Code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you can learn how to connect to your TiDB cluster using Visual Studio Code.
```

> **Note:**
>

> > This tutorial is compatible with TiDB Serverless, TiDB Dedicated, and TiDB Self-Hosted.
> 
> > **Note:**
> >
> > This tutorial also works with Visual Studio Code Remote Development enviorments including [Github Codespaces](https://github.com/features/codespaces), [Dev Containers](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/devcontainers/containers), [Visual Studio Code WSL](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/wsl), etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - This tutorial is compatible with TiDB Serverless, TiDB Dedicated, and TiDB Self-Hosted.
> - This tutorial also works with Visual Studio Code Remote Development environments, such as [GitHub Codespaces](https://github.com/features/codespaces), [Visual Studio Code Dev Containers](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/devcontainers/containers), and [Visual Studio Code WSL](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/wsl).
```

To complete this tutorial, you need:

> - [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/#alt-downloads) **1.72.0** or higher.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/#alt-downloads) **1.72.0** or later versions.
```

> To complete this tutorial, you will need:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To complete this tutorial, you need:
```

>     - Click [this link](vscode:extension/mtxr.sqltools-driver-mysql) to launch VS Code and install the extension directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Click <a href="vscode:extension/mtxr.sqltools-driver-mysql">this link</a>  to launch VS Code and install the extension directly.
```

<img width="908" alt="image" src="https://github.com/pingcap/docs/assets/60599231/1f6695bb-ce4a-45ce-bdbd-6935cd199010">

> - [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/#alt-downloads) `1.72.0` or higher.
> - [SQLTools MySQL/MariaDB/TiDB](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=mtxr.sqltools-driver-mysql) extension for Visual Studio Code. To install it,
>     - Just [click this link to launch VS Code and install it directly](vscode:extension/mtxr.sqltools-driver-mysql). 
>     - Or, visit [VS Code Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=mtxr.sqltools-driver-mysql) and click Install. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/#alt-downloads) **1.72.0** or higher.
- [SQLTools MySQL/MariaDB/TiDB](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=mtxr.sqltools-driver-mysql) extension for Visual Studio Code. To install it, you can use one of the following methods:
    - Click [this link](vscode:extension/mtxr.sqltools-driver-mysql) to launch VS Code and install the extension directly.
    - Navigate to [VS Code Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=mtxr.sqltools-driver-mysql) and click **Install**.
```

**If you don't have a TiDB cluster, you can create one as follows:**

- (Recommended) Follow [Creating a TiDB Serverless cluster](/develop/dev-guide-build-cluster-in-cloud.md) to create your own TiDB Cloud cluster.
- Follow [Deploy a local test TiDB cluster](/quick-start-with-tidb.md#deploy-a-local-test-cluster) or [Deploy a production TiDB cluster](/production-deployment-using-tiup.md) to create a local cluster.

</CustomContent>
<CustomContent platform="tidb-cloud">

**If you don't have a TiDB cluster, you can create one as follows:**

- (Recommended) Follow [Creating a TiDB Serverless cluster](/develop/dev-guide-build-cluster-in-cloud.md) to create your own TiDB Cloud cluster.
- Follow [Deploy a local test TiDB cluster](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/quick-start-with-tidb#deploy-a-local-test-cluster) or [Deploy a production TiDB cluster](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/production-deployment-using-tiup) to create a local cluster.

</CustomContent>

## Connect to TiDB

> Connect to your TiDB cluster depending on the TiDB deployment option you've selected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Connect to your TiDB cluster depending on the TiDB deployment option you have selected.
```

<SimpleTab>
<div label="TiDB Serverless">

1. Navigate to the [**Clusters**](https://tidbcloud.com/console/clusters) page, and then click the name of your target cluster to go to its overview page.

2. Click **Connect** in the upper-right corner. A connection dialog is displayed.

3. Ensure the configurations in the connection dialog match your operating environment.

>     - **Endpoint Type** is set to `Public`
>     - **Connect With** is set to `General`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **Endpoint Type** is set to `Public`.
    - **Connect With** is set to `General`.
```

    - **Operating System** matches your environment.

    > **Tip:**
    >

>     > If your VS Code is running against a remote development environment, select the remote operating system from the list. For example, if you are using Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL), switch to the corresponding Linux distribution. This is not necessary if you are using GitHub Codespaces.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    > If your VS Code is running on a remote development environment, select the remote operating system from the list. For example, if you are using Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL), switch to the corresponding Linux distribution. This is not necessary if you are using GitHub Codespaces.
```

6. In the setting pane, configure the following connection parameters:

    - **Connection name**: give this connection a meaningful name.
    - **Connection group**: (optional) give this group of connections a meaningful name. Connections with the same group name will be grouped together.
    - **Connect using**: select **Server and Port**.
    - **Server Address**: enter the `host` parameter from the TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
    - **Port**: enter the `port` parameter from the TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
    - **Database**: enter the database that you want to connect to.
    - **Username**: enter the `user` parameter from the TiDB Cloud connection dialog.
    - **Password mode**: select **SQLTools Driver Credentials**.
    - In the **MySQL driver specific options** area, configure the following parameters:

        - **Authentication Protocol**: select **default**.
        - **SSL**: select **Enabled**. TiDB Serverless requires a secure connection. In the **SSL Options (node.TLSSocket)** area, configure the **Certificate Authority (CA) Certificate File** field as the `ssl_ca` parameter from the TiDB Cloud connection dialog.

            > **Note:**
            >

>             > If you are running on Windows or GitHub Codespaces, you can leave **SSL** blank. By defaultm SQLTools trusts well-known CAs curated by Mozilla. For more information, see [TiDB Serverless root certificate management](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/secure-connections-to-serverless-clusters#root-certificate-management).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            > If you are running on Windows or GitHub Codespaces, you can leave **SSL** blank. By default SQLTools trusts well-known CAs curated by Mozilla. For more information, see [TiDB Serverless root certificate management](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/secure-connections-to-serverless-clusters#root-certificate-management).
```

    - Connection group: (Optional) A meanful name for the group of this connection. And the connections which have the same group name will be gethered together.
    - Connect using: Please select **Server and Port**.
    - Server Address: TiDB cluster host.
    - Port: TiDB cluster host.
    - Database: The database that you want to connect.
    - Username: TiDB cluster username.
    - Password mode:

        - If the password is empty, please select **Use empty password**.
        - Otherwise, please select **SQLTools Driver Credentials**.

    - In **MySQL driver specific options** scope:

        - Authentication Protocol: Please select **default**.
        - SSL: Please select **Disabled**.

    ![VS Code sqltools self-hosted connection config](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-connection-config-self-hosted.jpg)

3. Click **TEST CONNECTION**.
4. (Optional) If the password is not empty, click **Allow** in the popupwindow, then enter the password from TiDB cluster.

    ![VS Code sqltools self-hosted password](/media/develop/vsc-sqltools-password.jpg)

5. If you can see **Successfully connected!** text appared. Then click **SAVE CONNECTION**.

</div>
</SimpleTab>

## Next steps

> - Learn more usage of `Visual Studio Code` from [the documentation of Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs).
> - Learn more usage of `VSCode SQLTools` extension from [the documentation](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=mtxr.sqltools) and [GitHub repository](https://github.com/mtxr/vscode-sqltools) of SQLTools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Learn more usage of Visual Studio Code from [the documentation of Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs).
- Learn more usage of VS Code SQLTools extension from [the documentation](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=mtxr.sqltools) and [GitHub repository](https://github.com/mtxr/vscode-sqltools) of SQLTools.
```
